---
title: Product Strategy - Outcomes over Outputs
heroUrl: product-strategy/laurel-and-michael-evans-DsC24AEuYjc-unsplash.jpg
heroCaption:
  <span>Photo by <a
  href="https://unsplash.com/@laurelmike?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText">Laurel
  and Michael Evans</a> on <a
  href="/s/photos/factory?utm_source=unsplash&amp;utm_medium=referral&amp;utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a></span>
description:
  I describe myself as a product-focused developer. I care about the
  product.  Ultimately, whilst no end-user may ever know it, that product has my
  name against it and I take pride in developing something that I would want to
  use myself.
published: 2020-06-22T00:00:00Z
tags:
  - product development
  - conference
---

Moreover, I enjoy solving problems. Both in code and product. I am happiest when
developing a solution to an issue that a user has. I'm not talking particularly
about bugs, but about issues they have. Be it a tricky process that can be
simplified through software, or giving users the ability to do something they
previously could not.

So when I saw the lineup for the first day at Sofa Conf and how it was centred
around product strategy, I wrung my hands at the thought of attending.

Sofa Conf is a remote design conference held by the lovely folks over at
Clearleft. Alongside the product strategy day, there looked to be many
fascinating talks planned. Thankfully, I am lucky enough that my company agreed
to pay for my ticket and time to attend.

A quick bit of unsolicited advice: find yourself a company that is willing to
pay for these things, it shows they're as committed to you as you are to them.

## The Secret Weapon to Finding Focus

The first talk of the day was delivered by [Melissa
Perry](https://twitter.com/lissijean) and it was a fantastic start to the
conference.

The talk was about keeping laser-focused when defining your product strategy and
ensuring that your organisation isn't falling into "The Build Trap".

The Build Trap is a common pitfall that product teams can quite easily fall
into. The trap snares organisations that get over-eager with regards to building
new features. They dive into developing as many new features as possible instead
of taking the time to analyse where their effort should be pointed for maximum
returns. This was referred to as "Peanut Buttering", where you spread your
development team too thin working away (and spending money) on multiple features
that end up either sub-parr or not required at all.

This gives us the feeling of _fake progress_, where we are creating plenty of
output but none of it is valuable. Interestingly, parallels could be drawn
between this and Push vs Pull which I have spoken about previously, as that is
centred around customer need as opposed to forecast or perceived need.

### Feature Factories vs Product Strategy

Teams that have fallen to the build-trap are often referred to as "feature
factories".

Instead of being involved in the wider strategy and being engaged in the product
and company, developers simply become code monkeys that churn out features with
little buy-in to the overall direction of the product. You know what they say:
give enough monkeys with typewriters enough time and eventually, they'll
complete your backlog

As a developer, I want to be involved in _why_ I am creating what I'm creating.
I want to know that it is going to solve someone's problem and that what I'm
working on is _valuable_ to somebody.

Something that Melissa talked about that would help us developers in this is
Product Strategy.

A product strategy is essentially a top-level direction for the product that the
whole organisation can unite behind and work towards.

So instead of being told "Develop feature X", a strategy could say something
along the lines of: "increase engagement in Y" or "solve user problem Z". This
goal would be set at the top-level of the organisation, allowing the execution
of that goal to filter down through product teams to the developers.

This ultimately gives every employee a sense that they are involved in the
success of the organisation. Instead of being Feature Factories, we become
essential cogs in the success of the company.

## Outcomes over Output

The 2nd talk of the day was given by [Josh Seiden](https://twitter.com/jseiden)
and was centred around the premise of empowering teams to work towards outcomes
instead of output.

Josh argued that definitions are becoming increasingly important and defined an
outcome as "A change in human behaviour that creates value". Whereas an output
which is something that simply meets requirements. This might seem like a small
difference, but it is key.

For me, outcomes over output is not a new concept. It is something I often talk
about with a couple of developer friends of mine, 1 of which works in an
outcome-focused team. However, defining the difference is certainly something
alien, as I have never been involved in a team that places a higher value on the
outcome over the output.

The talk started out by outlining a simple pipeline:

Resources -> Activities -> Outputs -> Outcomes -> Impact.

The impact tends to be where you start, it details the behaviour you wish to
change.

The left-most 3 items build into the outputs, that is what you create to try and
achieve your impact.

And whilst you may meet the requirements for your outputs (and therefore,
traditionally congratulate yourselves on a job well done), if the outcomes
aren't met (aka if the behaviours aren't changed), then you don't achieve your
impact and therefore your whole project is a failure.

### Becoming outcome focused

So what can a leader do to drive their team towards outcomes as opposed to
outputs?

Well, they can frame all the work that makes it's way to the team as an
achievable goal. Instead of requesting features, request an impact.

The most powerful idea that Josh posed in this respect was to change how we look
at product roadmaps. Change your roadmap to include the _questions_ you want
answering instead of the features you wish to build.

Try: "How do we increase the number of logged on users?" or "How do we solve
this problem that users have?" as goals/impacts that you can have.

As a developer or designer? You need to ask the question of your leadership.

I find the most important question you can ask is simply "why". Why are we
developing this feature? What is it that we wish to achieve? If your leadership
aren't going to volunteer the information then you have to ask it of them.

## My Thoughts

My biggest bugbear as a developer is working on something that I don't feel
solves anyone's problem. It leads me to feel like my work is pointless. So
forgive me if I question you, but to be honest I've been doing that since I was
a small child and it doesn't look likely to stop now!

When I interviewed for my latest role, I was asked: what would you consider good
leadership? What would you like to see from management?

My answer was that I like direction. I like to know the company goals and what
the senior leadership wish for the company to achieve. I like these goals to
filter down through the company hierarchy to myself as a developer so that I
know what I'm doing is valuable. It also has the added benefit of giving me
confidence that the company is being led well.

So from a personal point of view, a good Product Strategy and focussing on
outcomes appeals to me.

From a business perspective, it just makes sense. If you want employees that
care about the success of the company and feel valued, moving to an
outcome-based approach to product development is key.

Not only that, but a sound strategy and attention to the problems you're trying
to solve ahead of their solutions leads to a better, more focussed, product.

Do one thing and do it well, as the old adage goes. Define where your value is
and excel at that. Cast your net too widely in the instance, and you find
yourself Peanut Buttered.
